Hello Friends
Let us understand the merge sort algorithm in this video.
Let us take an array of eight elements. Here the
start index  is zero and the end index is seven
The merge sort uses the divide and conquer strategy to
sort the elements. It first checks whether the start index is
less than the end index and if yes, then it
will calculate the mid index.
And then it will recursively divide the array into
two sub arrays from start to mid and from mid+1 to end
Finally when two recursive calls finish its task,
it will merge them using previously discussed method. So let us see how
So here start equal to 0 and end equal to 7
and since start is less than and mid will be
calculated and it will be 0+7 divided by 2
which is three
So we have calculated mid index and it is equal to 3
So call merge sort for the first half of the array.
That is till mid of the array.
So pass array, start and mid to the function merge sort
So merge sort is called recursively. Here
also we will first check if start is less than
end and it is, since 0 is less than 3.
So we can go inside and find the middle index
It will be 0+3 divided by 2 which is 1
So call merge sort again for array from start
till mid. So pass the array, start index zero
and mid index one. So merge sort is called recursively
again and here also we will first
check if start is less than end and it is. So find
mid and it will be equal to 0+1
divided by two which is zero. So we have found
the middle index and it is equal to zero. So call
merge sort again for the array from start till mid
So pass the array, start index zero and mid index zero.
So Merge Sort is again called recursively And
here also first we have to check if start is
less than end and it is not, since zero is
not less than zero. So we got a single element
here and the execution of current merge sort function is
completed and the control reaches the calling function. So here
it will continue the execution. The next statement to execute
here is mergesort(arr,mid+1, end)
So we are calling merge sort recursively
for the second half here.
So mid+1 equal to 1 and end equal to 1
And here also we have to check if start is
less than end and it is not since one is
not less than one. That is we have a single
element here. So if fails and the execution is completed
and control reaches the calling function and it will continue
the execution here. Here the next statement to execute is
merge(arr,start,mid,end)
and recall what merge function does. It will sort and
merge the two arrays using an additional temporary array
But in case of quick sort, we did not use
an additional array but here we do. So here compare
the two elements 5 and 20 and 5 is less
than 20. So copy it into temp array and then 20
is also copied.
Now the sorted temp array is copied to the original
array.
So the execution of this function is now completed
Now control reaches the calling function and execution will be
continued.
Here the next statement to execute is merge_sort(arr,mid+1,end)
So here we are
calling merge sort for the second half of the array.
So mid+1 equal to 2 here and end equal to 3
So merge sort is called and we will
first check if start is less than end. And here
it is, since 2 is less than 3. So first
find mid. And it will be equal to 2+3 divided
by 2 which is 2. So we have found the
middle index. It is equal to 2. So call merge sort
again for the array from start till mid. So pass
the array, start index 2 and mid index 2. So merge
sort is called recursively And here also we
will check if start is less than end and it
is not since 2 is not less than 2.
So we got a single element and the execution of current
merge sort function is also completed and control reaches the
calling function. So here it will continue the execution and
the next statement here to execute is
merge sort (arr,mid+1,end). So it is
called for the second half of the array and here
mid+1 equal to 3 and end equal to 3
And here also we have to check if start
is less than end and here start is equal to three and
end equal to three
So if will fail, so execution here is completed and
control reaches the calling function. And here the next statement
to execute is a function call to merge
As we learnt here the elements will be sorted in
the temporary array and it will be copied to the original
array and we have discussed the merge function in
detail in the previous video
So here now we have completed this functions execution
So control reaches the calling function And here we have
the next statement to execute is merge (arr,start,mid,end)
So merge is called and it will
compare the elements of two arrays and sort it in
the temporary array
So 5 is less than 30 so 5 is added
first to the temp array. 20 is less than 30
So it is also added. Now copy the second array
to temp and now we have the elements sorted in
the temp array
Now copy this to the original array and first half
of the actual input array is now sorted
Now since the execution of this function is completed, control
reaches here and continues the execution
And here we have merge sort(arr,mid+1,end)
so merge sort is recursively
called for the second half of the array and
we have mid+1 equal to four and end
equal to seven
So we will first check if start is less than
end and it is since four is less than seven. So find
the middle index it will be 4+7 divided
by 2 which is five So call merge sort again for
the array from start till mid So pass the array, start
index 4 and Middle index 5. So Merge sort is
called recursively And here also we will first
check if start is less than end and it is. So find
the middle index It will be 4+5 divided
by 2 which is 4. So the function merge sort
is again called recursively. Here also we will first
check if start is less than end and it is
not here since 4 is not less than 4. So
here we have a single element only and the execution
of current merge sort function is completed and the control
will reach the calling function
So here it will continue the execution and here the
next statement to execute is merge sort (arr,mid+1,end)
So we are calling merge
sort for the second half of the array. So mid+1
equal to five and end equal to five
And here also we have to check if start
is less than end. And we have start equal to
five and and equal to five
So the condition will fail and execution is completed and
control reaches the calling function.
And here the next statement to execute is a
function call for merge.
So here merge will compare the two elements 25 and 10
and 25 is greater than 10
so copy 10 first to temp array and then 25 is
also copied.
Now this sorted temp array is copied to the original
array
So the execution of this function is now completed
Now control reaches the calling function and execution will be
continued here the next statement to execute is a function
call to merge sort by passing mid+1 and
end
So we are calling the merge sort function for the
second half and here mid+1 equal to six
and end equal to seven
So merge sort is again called recursively And here
first we have to check if start is less than
end and it is here since 6 is less than 7
So we have to find the middle index and it
will be 6+7 divided by 2 which is 6
So mid equal to 6 here. So call merge sort
again for array the from start index till the middle index
so pass the array, start 6 and mid 6. So merge
sort is called recursively here also we have to
check if start is less than end and it is
not since six is not less than six. So we
got a single element here and the execution of current
merge sort function is completed. Now the control will reach
the calling function and here it will continue the execution.
And here the next statement to execute is a function
call to merge sort and we are calling merge sort
recursively for the second half. Here mid+1
will be equal to seven and end will be equal
to seven
So in this function also we have to check if
start is less than end But here it will fail
since seven is not less than seven. That is,
we have a single element here
So if failed so the execution is completed and control
reaches the calling function and the execution will be continued here.
Here the next statement to execute is a function
call to merge
So the elements 28 and 40 will be sorted in the
temp array and it will be copied to the orginal
array. Now we have completed this functions execution So control
reaches the calling function And here we have the next
statement to execute is again a function call to merge
So merge is called So it will compare the elements of
two arrays and sort it in the temporary array temp
So 10 is less than 28. So 10 is added first
to temp Now 25 is less than 28
So it is also added. Now copy the second array to
temp and now we have the element sorted in the
temp array
Now copy this to the original array and second
half of the actual input array is now sorted
Also the execution of this function is completed and the
control reaches here and here we have merge function so
it will compare first elements 5 and 10 and 5
is smaller
So it is copied first
to temp. Next 20 is greater than 10
So copy 10. Now 20 is less than 25
So add 20 and 30 is greater than 25
So add 25 again 30 is greater than 28
So add 28
30 is less than 40
So add 30 and since first array is completed copy
the remaining elements of array 2 to temp and
it is done
We have the whole array sorted in the temp array
Now copy it to the original array
So finally we have the sorted array using the merge
sort algorithm.
The sorted elements are 5 10 20 25 28 30 40
and 45
So this is how we perform sorting using the merge sort algorithm.